== The Tutorial: Your first Project ==

We have mentioned already that TaskJuggler uses plain text files that
describe the project to schedule it. As you will see now, the syntax
of these files is easy to understand and very intuitive. This chapter
will walk you step by step through your first project. You create the
project plan for a made-up accounting software project. Refer to
Chapter 8 for a full listing of the example. This project
demonstrates some of the basic features of TaskJuggler; for more
advanced features please refer to Chapter 6.

=== Starting the project ===

To start a TaskJuggler project file you need to use the project
property.

 project acso "Accounting Software" "1.0" 2002-01-16 - 2002-04-26 {
   now 2002-03-04
   timeformat "%Y-%m-%d"
   currency "EUR"
   scenario plan "Plan" {
     # Mark all paths as critical that have less than 10%
     # slack time.
     minslackrate 10.0
     scenario delayed "Delayed"
   }
 }

It tells TaskJuggler the default project ID, a short name for your
project, a version number and a start and end date. The start and end
dates don't need to be exact, but must enclose all tasks. They specify
the time interval the TaskJuggler scheduler will use to fit the tasks
in. So, make it large enough for all your tasks to fit in. But don't
make it too large, because this will result in longer scheduling times
and higher memory consumption.

All TaskJuggler properties have a certain number of fixed attributes
and a set of optional attributes. Optional attributes are always
enclosed in curly braces. In this example we use the optional
attributes now to set the current day for the scheduler to another
value than to the moment your invoke TaskJuggler. We pick a day in the
specified project period and we will always get the same results of a
TaskJuggler run, no matter when we process our first project. The
currency attribute specifies the unit of currency values.

Because each culture has it's own way of specifying dates, the format
is configurable.  Use the timeformat attribute to specify the default
format. This is the format used for reports. It's not the format that
you use in TaskJuggler project files. This format is fixed and must be
Year-Month-Day-Hours:Minutes:Seconds-Timezone.  All values after day
are optional.

In this tutorial we would like to compare two scenarios of the
project. The first scenario is the one that we have planned. The
second scenario is how it really happened. The two scenarios have the
same task structure, but the start and end dates of the task may vary.
In reality we assume that the project got delayed, so we call the
second scenario "Delayed". The scenario property is used to specify
the scenarios. The delayed scenario is nested into the plan scenario.
This tells TaskJuggler to use all values from the plan scenario also
for the delayed scenario unless the delay scenario has it's own
values. We'll see further below, how to specify values for a scenario.

Certain attributes are scenario specific. These have to be included in
the scenario definition.  In this example, we use the minslackrate
attribute to specify the percentage of slack time a task path must at
least have before it is considered a critical path. Tasks on critical
paths are marked with a red frame in the graphical user interface.

=== Global Attributes ===

Besides finding suitable start and end dates of our project, we also
like to do a simple profit and loss analysis. So we have to specify
the default daily costs of an employee. This can be changed for
certain employees later, but it illustrates an important concept of
TaskJuggler – inheritance of attributes. In order to reduce the size
of the TaskJuggler project file to a readable minimum, properties
inherit many optional attributes from their enclosing scopes. We'll
see further below, what this actually means. Here we are at top-level
scope, so this is the default for all following properties.

 rate 310.0

The rate attribute can be used to specify the daily costs of
resources. All subsequent resources will have this rate unless
specified differently.

You might also want to tell TaskJuggler about holidays that affect
all resources. Global vacations are periods where TaskJuggler does
not do any resource assignments to tasks.

 # Register Good Friday as a global holiday for all resources.
 vacation "Good Friday" 2002-03-29

Use the vacation attribute to define a global vacation. Global
vacations must have a name and a date or date range. This is slightly
different from vacations of individual resources. They are defined
with the vacation attribute for resources and are unnamed.

Macros are another TaskJuggler feature to keep project files small.
Macros are text patterns that can be defined once and inserted
multiple times in the project file. A macro always has a name and the
text pattern is enclosed by square brackets. 

 macro allocate_developers [
   allocate dev1
   allocate dev2 { limits { dailymax 4h } }
   allocate dev3
 ]

To use the macro you simply have to write
''''${allocate_developers}'''' and TaskJuggler will replace the term
''''${allocate_developers}'''' with the pattern. We will use this
macro further below in the example and then explain the meaning of the
pattern.

=== Declaring Resources ===

A TaskJuggler feature that you will probably make heavy use of is
flags. Once declared you can attach them to many properties. When you
generate reports of the TaskJuggler results, you can use the flags to
filter out information and limit the report to exactly those details
that you want to have included.

 flags team
 
 resource dev "Developers" {
   resource dev1 "Paul Smith" { rate 330.0 }
   resource dev2 "Sébastien Bono"
   resource dev3 "Klaus Müller" {
     vacation 2002-02-01 - 2002-02-05
   }
 
   flags team
 }
 
 resource misc "The Others" {
   resource test "Peter Murphy" {
     limits { dailymax 6.4h }
     rate 240.0
   }
   resource doc "Dim Sung" { rate 280.0 }
 
   flags team
 }

This snippet of the example shows the resource property. Resources
always have an ID and a Name. IDs may only consist of ASCII
characters, numbers and the underline character. All global
TaskJuggler properties have IDs. They need to be unique within their
property class. The ID is necessary so that we can reference the
property again later without having to write the potentially much
longer name. Names are strings and as such enclosed in double quotes.
Strings may contain any character, even non-ASCII characters.  As you
can see, resource properties can be nested: dev is a virtual resource,
a team that consists of three other resources.

dev1, alias Paul Smith, costs more than the normal employee. So the
declaration of dev1 overwrites the inherited default rate with a new
value of 330.0.

The default value has been inherited from the enclosing scope,
resource dev, which in turn has inherited it from the global scope.
The declaration of the resource Klaus Müller uses another optional
attribute. With vacation you can specify a certain time interval where
the resource is not available.

Here you need to understand how TaskJuggler handles time intervals.
Internally, TaskJuggler uses the number of seconds after January 1st,
1970 to store any date.  So all dates are actually stored with an
accuracy of 1 second. 2002-02-01 specifies midnight February 1st,
2002. Again following the TaskJuggler concept of requiring as little
information as necessary and extending the rest with sensible
defaults, TaskJuggler adds the time 0:00:00 if nothing else has been
specified. So the vacation ends on midnight February 5th, 2002. Well,
almost. Every time you specify a time interval, the end date is not
included in the interval.  But the second before the date that you
have specified is. So Klaus Müllers vacation ends 23:59:59 on February
4th, 2002.

Peter Murphy only works 6.4 hours a day. So we use the limits
attribute to limit his daily working hours. We could also define exact
working hours using the shift property, but we ignore this for now.

Note that we have attached the flag team after the declaration of the
sub-resources to the team resources.  This way, these flags don't get
handed down to the sub-resources. If we would have declared the flags
before the sub-resources, then they would have the flags attached as
well.

=== Declaring Accounts ===

The use of our resources will create costs. For a profit and loss
analysis, we need to balance the costs against the customer payments.
In order not to get lost with all the various amounts, we declare 3
accounts to credit the amounts to. We create one account for the
development costs, one for the documentation costs, and one for the
customer payments.

 account dev "Development" cost
 account doc "Documentation" cost
 account rev "Payments" revenue

The account property has three fixed attributes: an ID, a name, and a
type. The type can either be cost or revenue. For the analysis
TaskJuggler subtracts the total amount of all cost accounts from the
total amount from all revenue accounts.

Accounts can also be nested. Nested accounts may not have a type
specified. They inherit the type of the top-level account.

=== Specifying the Tasks ===

Let's focus on the real work now. The project should solve a problem:
the creation of an accounting software. Because the job is quite
complicated, we break it down into several subtasks. We need to do a
specification, develop the software, test the software, and write a
manual. In TaskJuggler syntax this would look as follows:

 task AcSo "Accounting Software" {
   task spec "Specification" 
   task software "Software Development"
   task test "Software testing"
   task deliveries "Milestones"
 }

Similar to resources, tasks are declared by using the task keyword
followed by an ID and a name string. All TaskJuggler properties have
their own namespaces. This means, that it is quite OK to have a
resource and a task with the same ID. Tasks may have optional
attributes which can be tasks again, so tasks can be nested. In
contrast to all other TaskJuggler properties, task IDs inherit the ID
of the enclosing task as a prefix to the ID. The full ID of the spec
task is AcSo.spec.

To track important milestones of the project, we also added a task
called Milestones. This task, like most of the other tasks will get
some subtasks later on. We consider the specification task simple
enough, so we don't have to break it into further subtasks. So let's
add some more details to it.

 task spec "Specification" {
   effort 20d
   ${allocate_developers}
   depends !deliveries.start
 }

The effort to complete the task is specified with 20 man-days.
Alternatively we could have used the length attribute or the duration
attribute. length specifies the duration of the task in working days
while duration specifies the duration in calendar days. Contrary to
effort, these two don't have to have a specification of the involved
resources. Since effort specifies the duration in man-days, we need to
say who should be allocated to the task. The task won't finish before
the resources could be allocated long enough to reach the specified
effort. Tasks with length or duration criteria and allocated resources
will last exactly as long as requested. Resources will be allocated
only if available.

Here we use the allocate_developers macro mentioned above. The
expression ''''${allocate_developers}'''' is simply expanded to 

 allocate dev1
 allocate dev2 { limits { dailymax 4h } }
 allocate dev3

If you need to allocate the same bunch of people to several tasks, the
macro saves you some typing. You could have written the allocate
attributes directly instead of using the macro. Since the allocation
of multiple resources to a task is a very common place for macro
usage, we found it a good idea to use it in this example as well.

One more interesting thing to note is the fact that we like the
resource dev2 only to work 50% of the day on this task, so we use the
optional attribute limits to specify this.

For TaskJuggler to schedule a task, it needs to know either the start
and end criteria of a task, or one of them and a duration
specification. The start and end criteria can either be fixed dates or
relative dates. Relative dates are specifications of the type "task B
starts after task A has finished". Or in other words, task B depends
on task A. In this example the spec task depends on a subtasks of the
deliveries task. We have not specified it yet, but it has the local ID
start.

To specify the dependency between the two tasks, we use the depends
attribute. This attribute must be followed by one or more task IDs. If
more than one ID is specified, each ID has to be separated with a
comma from the previous one. Task IDs can be either absolute IDs or
relative IDs. An absolute ID of a task is the ID of this task
prepended by the IDs of all enclosing tasks. The task IDs are
separated by a dot from each other. The absolute ID of the
specification task would be AcSo.spec.

Relative IDs always start with one or more exclamation marks. Each
exclamation mark moves the scope to the next enclosing task. So
!deliveries.start is expanded to AcSo.deliveries.start since AcSo is
the enclosing task of deliveries. Relative task IDs are a little bit
confusing at first, but have a real advantage over absolute IDs.
Sooner or later you want to move tasks around in your project and then
it's a lot less likely that you have to fix dependency specifications
of relative IDs.

The software development task is still too complex to specify it
directly. So we split it further into subtasks.

 task software "Software Development" {
   priority 1000
   task database "Database coupling"
   task gui "Graphical User Interface"
   task backend "Back-End Functions"
 }

We use the priority attribute to mark the importance of the tasks. 500
is the default priority of top-level tasks. Setting the priority to
1000 marks the task as most important task, since the possible range
is 1 (not important at all) to 1000 (ultimately important). priority
is an attribute that is handed down to subtasks if specified before
the subtasks' declaration. So all subtasks of software have a priority
of 1000 as well, unless they have their own priority definition.

 task database "Database coupling" {
   effort 20d
   depends !!spec
   allocate dev1, dev2
 }

The work on the database coupling should not start before the
specification has been finished. So we again use the depends attribute
to let TaskJuggler know about this. This time we use two exclamation
marks for the relative ID. The first one puts us in the scope of the
enclosing software task. The second one is to get into the AcSo scope
that contains the spec tasks. This time we allocate resources directly
without using a macro.

 task gui "Graphical User Interface" {
   effort 35d
   delayed:effort 40d
   depends !database, !backend
   allocate dev2, dev3
 }

TaskJuggler can schedule your project for two different scenarios. We
have called the first scenario "plan" scenario and the second
"delayed" scenario. Many of the reports allow you to put the values of
both scenarios side by side to each other, so you can compare the two
scenarios. All scenario-specific values that are not explicitly stated
for the delayed scenario are taken from the plan scenario. So the user
only has to specify the values that differ in the delayed scenario.
The two scenarios must have the same task structure and the same
dependencies. But the start and end dates of tasks as well as the
duration may vary. In the example we have planned the work on the
graphical user interface to be 35 man-days. It turned out that we
actually needed 40 man-days. By prefixing the start effort attribute
with delayed:, the effort value for the delayed scenario can be
specified.

 task backend "Back-End Functions" {
   effort 30d
   complete 95
   depends !database, !!spec
   allocate dev1
   allocate dev2
 }

By default, TaskJuggler assumes that all tasks are on schedule.
Sometimes you want to generate reports that show how much of a task
has actually been completed. TaskJuggler uses the current date for
this, unless you have specified another date using the now attribute.
If a task is ahead of schedule or late, this can be specified using
the complete attribute. This specifies how many percent of the task
have been completed up to the current date. In our case the back-end
implementation is slightly ahead of schedule as we will see from the
report.

 task test "Software testing" {

   task alpha "Alpha Test" {
     effort 1w
     depends !!software
     allocate test, dev2
   }

   task beta "Beta Test" {
     effort 4w
     depends !alpha
     allocate test, dev1
   }
 }

The software testing task has been split up into an alpha and a beta
test task. The interesting thing here is, that efforts can not only be
specified as man-days, but also man-weeks, man-hours, etc. By default,
TaskJuggler assumes a man-week is 40 man-hours or 5 man-days. These
values can be changed using the dailyworkinghours attribute.

Let's go back to the outermost task again. At the beginning of the
example we stated that we want to credit all development work to one
account with ID dev and all documentation work to the account doc. To
achieve this, we use the attribute account to credit all tasks to the
dev account.

 task AcSo "Accounting Software" {

   account dev

   task software "Software Development" {

Since we specify the attribute for the top-level task before we
declare any subtasks, this attribute will be inherited by all subtasks
and their subtasks and so on. The only exception is the writing of the
manual. We need to change the account for this task again, as it is
also a subtask of AcSo.

 task manual "Manual" {
   effort 10w
   depends !deliveries.start
   allocate doc, dev3
   account doc
 }

=== Specifying Milestones ===

All tasks that have been discussed so far, had a certain duration. We
did not always specify the duration explicitly, but we expect them to
last for a certain period of time. Sometimes you just want to capture
a certain moment in your project plan. These moments are usually
called milestones, since they have some level of importance for the
progress of the project.

TaskJuggler has support for milestones as well. They are handled as
special types of tasks. By using the optional attribute milestone for
a task, this task is declared a milestone. Milestones have no
duration, so it's illegal to specify any duration criteria, or a non
identical start and end date.

 task deliveries "Milestones" {

   account rev

   task start "Project start" {
     milestone
     start 2002-01-16
     delayed:start 2002-01-20
     startcredit 33000.0
   }

   task prev "Technology Preview" {
     milestone
     depends !!software.backend
     startcredit 13000.0
   }

   task beta "Beta version" {
     milestone
     depends !!test.alpha
     startcredit 13000.0
   }

   task done "Ship Product to customer" {
     milestone
     # maxend 2002-04-17
     depends !!test.beta, !!manual
     startcredit 14000.0
   }
 }

We have put all important milestones of the project as subtasks of the
deliveries task. This way they show up nicely grouped in the reports.
All milestones either have a dependency or a fixed start date. For the
first milestone we have used the attribute start to set a fixed start
date. All other tasks have direct or indirect dependencies on this
task. Moving back the start date will slip the whole project. This has
actually happened, so we use the delayed: prefix again to specify the
start date for the delayed scenario.

Every milestone is linked to a customer payment. By using the
startcredit attribute we can credit the specified amount to the
account associated with this task. Since we have assigned the rev
account to the enclosing task, all milestones will use this account as
well.

Did you notice the line in the task done that starts with a hash? This
line is commented out. If TaskJuggler finds a hash, it ignores the
rest of the line. This way you can include comments in your project.
The maxend attribute specifies that the task should end no later than
the specified date. This information is not used for scheduling, but
only for checking the schedule afterwards. Since the task will end
later than the specified date, commenting out the line would trigger a
warning.

Now the project has been completely specified. Stopping here would
result in a valid TaskJuggler file that could be processed and
scheduled. But no reports would be generated to visualize the results.

=== Generating Reports of the scheduled Project ===

TaskJuggler offers a number of report types. Probably the most popular ones are interactive reports and HTML reports.

==== Generating Interactive Reports ====

Interactive reports are only available in the TaskJuggler GUI. The
command line version will just ignore interactive report definitions.
To view a task report in the GUI, you have to add the following lines
to your project. This will give you a list of all the project's tasks
and the classical Gantt chart.

 taskreport "Gantt Chart" {
   headline "Project Gantt Chart"
   columns hierarchindex, name, start, end, effort, duration, chart
   timeformat "%a %Y-%m-%d"
   loadunit days
   hideresource 1
 }

The GUI requires the name column to be present in the report. If you
don't specify it, it will be added automatically. It does not support
any of the index columns. They will not be shown in the GUI.
Nonetheless, it's a good idea to request it, as the printed version of
the interactive reports behave like the other reports. They only show
specified columns. The printed reports repeat the first column on
every page in case it does not fit on a single page. To print a report
from the GUI just select File->Print from the menu or click the
printer icon in the toolbar.

For this report we like to have the abbreviated weekday in front of
the date. %a is the tag for this. See the manual for a complete list
of all options.

We don't want to see any resources in this report, so we hide them
all. 1 means always hide a resource. To show all resources we could
write a 0, which means never hide a resource. Or we could write a
logical expression that only shows the leaf resources and sorts them
by name as we did for the next report. It's a list of all tasks
showing the resources assigned to each task.

 taskreport "Task Usage" {
   headline "Task Usage Report"
   columns hierarchindex, name, start, end, effort { title "Work" }, duration,
     cost, revenue
   timeformat "%Y-%m-%d"
   loadunit days
   hideresource ~isLeaf()
   sortresources nameup
 }

The default title for the effort column is replaced with a custom
title. Additionally we show the cost and revenue of all tasks and
resources. All loads are shown as resource-days.  The next report is
similar to the first one, but has the completion degree as additional
column.

 # A list of all tasks with the percentage complete for each task
 taskreport "Tracking Gantt" {
   headline "Tracking Gantt Chart"
   columns hierarchindex, name, start, end, effort { title "Work" }, duration,
     completed, chart
   timeformat "%a %Y-%m-%d"
   loadunit days
   hideresource 1
 }

We can also have resource-centric reports. This is done with the
report type resourcereport. The following report is showing resource
allocation. It identifies whether each resource is under- or
over-allocated for.

 resourcereport "Resource Graph" {
   headline "Resource Allocation Graph"
   columns no, name, rate, utilization, freeload, chart
   loadunit days
   hidetask 1
 }

The next report is a list of all project resources, both human and
material resources, together with the associated costs.

 resourcereport "Resource Sheet" {
   headline "Resource Sheet"
   columns no, name, efficiency, id, maxeffort, rate
   loadunit days
   hidetask 1
 }

The next report is similar to the previous one, but also lists the
tasks for each of the resources. It also provides details about the
cost for each resource and task.

 # A list of resources and each task associated with each resource.
 resourcereport "Resource Usage" {
   headline "Resource Usage Report"
   columns no, name, utilization, freeload, cost
   loadunit days
   hidetask 0
 }

==== Generating HTML Reports ====

In addition to the interactive reports, TaskJuggler also provides HTML
reports. These reports have the benefit that you can create report
files that you can publish on a web server. TaskJuggler supports a
variety of HTML reports. Please refer to the manual for a full list.
In this tutorial we will only cover a subset of them.

To conclude the HTML reports, a report is generated that shows how
poorly the project is calculated. The company won't get rich with this
project. Due to the slip, it actually needs a loan from the bank to
pay the salaries.

 htmlaccountreport "Accounting.html" {
   columns no, name, scenario, total, monthly
   headline "P&L for the Project"
   caption "The table shows the profit and loss analysis as well as
            the cashflow situation of the Accounting Software Project."
   accumulate
   scenarios plan, delayed
 }

The htmlaccountreport property produces similar reports as the ones
shown above, but it lists accounts instead of tasks or resources. The
total column shows the value of the account at the end of the reported
time interval. The accumulate attribute puts the calendar in
accumulation mode. The monthly columns list the value of the account
at the end of the month. Normally the amount that has been added or
subtracted from the account would be listed.

